>> O'Brien: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, MAY 1:
FULL COURT PRESS IN THE HOOSIER
STATE, AS WHITE HOUSE HOPEFULS
COMPETE FOR VOTES IN INDIANA'S
PRIMARY THIS TUESDAY.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WHY
LOUISIANA HAS A WAITING LIST FOR
PUBLIC DEFENDERS, WITH SUSPECTS
SPENDING MORE TIME IN JAIL.
AND THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS.
IS THE TERRORIST GROUP LOSING
GROUND?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN.
>> O'Brien: HELLO AND THANKS FOR
JOINING US.
A PIVOTAL PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARY
IN THE REPUBLICAN RACE FOR WHITE
HOUSE IS TWO DAYS AWAY IN
INDIANA.
OF TEN STATES LEFT TO VOTE,
INDIANA IS THE LARGEST DELEGATE
PRIZE LEFT UNTIL THE LAST
PRIMARY, IN CALIFORNIA, IN JUNE.
IN INDIANA, THE REPUBLICAN
WINNER WILL TAKE MOST OF THE
STATE'S 57 REPUBLICAN DELEGATES.
NEW YORK BUSINESSMAN DONALD
TRUMP IS AIMING TO STRETCH HIS
430 DELEGATE LEAD IN THE RACE
FOR 1,237 DELEGATES NEEDED TO BE
NOMINATED.
HE'S CLOSING IN ON 1,000.
TEXAS SENATOR TED CRUZ IS TRYING
TO STOP TRUMP'S MOMENTUM, AND TO
HELP HIM WIN INDIANA, THE THIRD
REPUBLICAN IN THE RACE, OHIO
GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH, HAS CEDED
THE STATE.
CRUZ PICKED UP TEN NATIONAL
DELEGATES THIS WEEKEND AT A
REPUBLICAN STATE CONVENTION IN
VIRGINIA, WHERE TRUMP GOT THREE.
ON THE DEMOCRATIC SIDE, FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON RETURNED TO INDIANA
TODAY TO RALLY SUPPORTERS WHO
GAVE HER A PRIMARY VICTORY THERE
IN 2008 OVER BARACK OBAMA.
SHE LEADS VERMONT SENATOR BERNIE
SANDERS BY AROUND 300 PLEDGED
DELEGATES WON IN PRIMARIES AND
CAUCUSES AND 800 OVERALL.
SANDERS SAID TODAY CATCHING
CLINTON IS "DIFFICULT BUT NOT
IMPOSSIBLE."
FOR MORE ON THE INDIANA PRIMARY,
I AM JOINED FROM INDIANAPOLIS BY
ZACH OSOWSKI, A POLITICAL
REPORTER WITH THE "EVANSVILLE
COURIER AND PRESS."
THANKS FOR TALKING WITH ME.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> WE SEE IN AN NBC NEWS WALL
STREET JOURNAL POLL OUT, DONALD
TRUMP HAS QUITE A LEAD,
GIVE ME A SENSE OF CONFIDENCE IN
A TRUMP VICTORY.
WHAT WOULD THE IMPLICATIONS OF
THAT BE?
>> OBVIOUSLY A VICTORY HERE
WOULD PRETTY MUCH PAVE THE BE
WAY TO LOCKING UP THE
NOMINATION.
TED CRUZ HAS BEEN FIGHTING HARD
IN INDIANA BECAUSE HE KNOWS IF
HE WINS HERE, GETTING THE 1237
FOR TRUMP A LITTLE MORE
DIFFICULT.
BUT RIGHT NOW, WITH THE NUMBERS
WE'RE SEEING WITH THAT POLL, IT
DOESN'T LOOK LIKE THAT HARD
WORK'S PAYING OFF QUITE YET.
>> WHAT HAPPENED TO THE STOP
TRUMP MOVEMENT AND THE
KASICH-CRUZ ALLIANCE?
HAS IT FALLEN APART?
>> IT SEEMS LIKE IT HAS.
YOU KNOW IT WAS JUST LAST WEEK
THAT JOHN KASICH SAID HE WAS
SUSPENDING HIS INDIANA CAMPAIGN.
BUT THEN JUST A COUPLE OF DAYS
LATER, JOHN KASICH SAID IF
VOTERS WANT TO VOTE FOR HIM
THEY'RE MORE THAN WELCOME TO
VOTE FOR HIM AND TED CRUZ SAID
THERE'S NO ALLIANCE BETWEEN HIM
AND KASICH.
THERE SEEMS TO BE A BIT OF A
BACKLASH FROM THE ALLIANCE THAT
WAS ANNOUNCED LAST WEEK.
PEOPLE SAID IT MADE CRUZ LOOK
PRETTY DESPERATE AND IT SEEMS
LIKE HE WANTED TO BACK AWAY FROM
THAT AND THERE WASN'T AN
ALLIANCE AND HE WAS TRYING TO
WIN INDIANA ON HIS OWN.
>> WHAT IS THE POWER OF
ENDORSEMENTS BEEN?
>> IT'S HARD TO SAY.
OBVIOUSLY THE ARE ENDORSEMENT OF
GOVERNOR MIKE PENCE, HE SAID HE
WOULD BE VOTING FOR CRUZ.
IT'S HARD TO SEE THE ENDORSEMENT
OF PENCE, WHETHER VOTING FOR
TRUMP OR CRUZ ALREADY.
>> HOW DO YOU SEE THE DEMOCRATIC
RACE SHAPING UP?
>> MORE AND MORE UNLIKELY THAT
SANDERS IS GOING TO GET THE
DEMOCRAT NOMINATION.
THIS RACE IS PRETTY MUCH A
TOSSUP.
I THINK IF VOTER TURNOUT IS
PRETTY BIG ON TUESDAY, SANDERS
HAS A CHANCE TO WIN, BUT IT
SEEMS MORE AND MORE LIKELY THAT
HILLARY CLINTON IS GOING TO LOCK
UP THE DEMOCRAT NOMINATION
PRETTY SOON.
>> IT SEEMS VERY UNLIKELY
INDIANA IS THE FOCUS OF
EVERYBODY'S ATTENTION IN AN
ELECTION YEAR.
>> WE HAVEN'T SEEN SO MUCH
ATTENTION HERE SINCE 2008 WHEN
BARACK OBAMA AND HILLARY CLINTON
WERE STILL BATTLING OUT FOR THE
DEMOCRAT NOMINATION AND YOU
COULD SEE THE EXCITEMENT LEVEL
REGARDLESS OF WHICH RALLY YOU GO
TO WHETHER IT'S A TRUMP REALLY,
RALLY OR HILLARY CLINTON, LINES
ARE LONG TO SEE HER.
HOOSIERS ARE EXCITED TO PLAY A
BIG ROLE IN THE PROCESS.
>> ZACH, THANKS FOR BEING WITH
ME.
>> THANK YOU.
>> O'Brien: IN IRAQ, A LARGE
PROTEST INSIDE BAGHDAD'S
HEAVILY FORTIFIED GREEN ZONE
ENDED HAS ENDED PEACEFULLY.
AFTER A 24-HOUR SIT-IN, HUNDREDS
OF PROTESTERS AGREED TO DISPERSE
TODAY AND LEFT THE DISTRICT
WHERE THE PARLIAMENT AND FOREIGN
EMBASSIES ARE LOCATED.
YESTERDAY, THE FOLLOWERS OF
SHIITE CLERIC MUQTADA AL-SADR
TORE DOWN A PROTECTIVE BLAST
WALL, STORMED THE GREEN ZONE,
AND OCCUPIED PARLIAMENT TO
DEMAND POLITICAL REFORMS.
IT WAS THE FIRST TIME THE GREEN
ZONE HAD EVER BEEN BREACHED.
IRAQI PRIME MINISTER HAIDER AL-
ABADI HAS VOWED TO ENACT
REFORMS.
IN CONTINUED SECTARIAN VIOLENCE,
ISIS CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
SUICIDE CAR BOMBINGS TODAY ON A
BUS STATION AND A GOVERNMENT
BUILDING IN A MOSTLY SHIITE CITY
140 MILES SOUTH OF BAGHDAD.
POLICE SAY AT LEAST 32 PEOPLE
WERE KILLED AND AT LEAST 75
OTHERS WOUNDED.
THE AIRPORT IN BRUSSELS,
BELGIUM, BOMBED BY ISIS
TERRORISTS 40 DAYS AGO, HAS
REPAIRED AND REOPENED ITS MAIN
DEPARTURE HALL.
UNTIL TODAY, PASSENGERS HAD BEEN
USING A TEMPORARY CHECK-IN TENT.
BELGIAN PRIME MINISTER CHARLES
MICHEL SAID, "WE CHOOSE TO
RESIST.
BRUSSELS IS BACK IN BUSINESS."
HE UNVEILED A PLAQUE
COMMEMORATING THE 16 PEOPLE
KILLED BY SUICIDE BOMBERS THERE
ON MARCH 22.
THE AIRPORT HOPES TO REACH 100
PERCENT CAPACITY NEXT MONTH.
FOLLOWING FIVE TO TEN INCHES OF
RAIN OVER THE PAST TWO DAYS, THE
NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE HAS
ISSUED A FLASH FLOOD WATCH FOR
PARTS OF LOUISIANA AND OF TEXAS.
THE NEW ORLEANS JAZZ FEST
WRAPPED UP TODAY UNDER GRAY
SKIES.
SEVERE THUNDERSTORMS YESTERDAY
CAUSED THE ANNUAL FESTIVAL TO
CANCEL PERFORMANCES BY STEVIE
WONDER, SNOOP DOGG, BUDDY GUY
AND BECK.
ANTI-WAR ACTIVIST DANIEL
BERRIGAN HAS DIED.
BERRIGAN, A JESUIT PRIEST, AND
HIS LATE BROTHER, PHILIP, ALSO A
PRIEST BECAME FAMOUS FOR BURNING
VIETNAM DRAFT CARDS.
THEY WERE PROSECUTED, WITH SEVEN
OTHER ACTIVISTS, FOR DESTROYING
GOVERNMENT PROPERTY, AFTER
SEIZING HUNDREDS OF RECORDS FROM
A SELECTIVE SERVICE OFFICE IN
CATONSVILLE, MARYLAND, IN 1968.
THE DEFENDANTS BECAME KNOWN AS
THE "CATONSVILLE NINE," AND
BERRIGAN SERVED TWO YEARS IN
FEDERAL PRISON.
IN LATER YEARS, BERRIGAN
PROTESTED NUCLEAR WEAPONS, THE
WAR IN IRAQ, AND TOOK PART IN
OCCUPY WALL STREET.
HE ALSO WROTE 50 BOOKS,
INCLUDING 15 VOLUMES OF POETRY.
DANIEL BERRIGAN WAS 94-YEARS-
OLD.
>> O'Brien: WATCH ANY TV CRIME
DRAMA, AND YOU'RE BOUND TO HEAR
A POLICE OFFICER TELL SOMEONE
BEING ARRESTED, IF YOU CANNOT
AFFORD AN ATTORNEY, ONE WILL BE
PROVIDED FOR YOU.
THE RIGHT TO COUNSEL IS A
CONSTITUTIONAL GUARANTEE, AND A
NECESSITY, AS 80% OF ALL STATE
CRIMINAL DEFENDANTS QUALIFY FOR
A PUBLIC DEFENDER.
YET, GOVERNMENT SPENDING ON
PUBLIC DEFENDERS HAS DECREASED
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, LEADING 43
STATES TO REQUIRE THEIR INDIGENT
CLIENTS TO PAY PART OF THEIR
LEGAL FEES.
ONE OF THOSE STATES IS
LOUISIANA, WHERE BUDGET AND
CASELOAD CUTS HAVE CREATED A
BACKLOG IN THE COURT SYSTEM.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JOHN LARSON WENT DOWN TO NEW
ORLEANS TO FIND OUT MORE.
>> Reporter: A PUBLIC DEFENDER
IN NEW ORLEANS, WILL SNOWDEN IS
ON HIS WAY TO JAIL TO MEET A
CLIENT, A MAN CHARGED WITH ARMED
ROBBERY AND FACING A
POTENTIALLY VERY LONG PRISON
TERM.
>> WE AS A PUBLIC DEFENDER
OFFICE TAKE OUR RESPONSIBILITY
OF REPRESENTING THE POOR FOLKS
OF NEW ORLEANS VERY SERIOUSLY.
AND WHEN THAT BECOMES IN
JEOPARDY BECAUSE OF OUR WORKLOAD
AND OUR CASELOAD, THAT'S NOT
SOMETHING WE'RE WILLING TO
SACRIFICE.
>> Reporter: IN HIS THIRD YEAR
ON THE JOB, SNOWDEN WORKS SIX
DAYS A WEEK.
HE'S HANDLING AROUND 75 CASES,
BUT HE USED TO JUGGLE 120, UNTIL
HIS BOSS TOLD ATTORNEYS IN HIS
OFFICE TO REFUSE NEW CASES, DUE
TO A SHORTAGE OF FUNDS.
>> IT'S VERY CONTRADICTORY TO
THE REASON WHY I CAME HERE IN
THE FIRST PLACE.
I CAME HERE TO REPRESENT POOR
FOLKS WHO ARE CHARGED WITH
CRIMES, TO GIVE THEM ADEQUATE,
STELLAR, QUALITY REPRESENTATION,
AND NOBODY IN MY OFFICE IS ABLE
TO DO THAT WHEN PEOPLE GET PUT
ON A WAIT LIST BECAUSE WE SIMPLY
DON'T HAVE THE FUNDS.
>> Reporter: 85% OF THE MORE
THAN 20,000 CASES THAT MOVE
THROUGH THE NEW ORLEANS CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM EVERY YEAR
REQUIRE THE HELP OF A PUBLIC
DEFENDER.
YET, SINCE JANUARY, THE PUBLIC
DEFENDERS OFFICE HAS REFUSED 125
DEFENDANTS REQUESTING ITS HELP,
AND PUT THEM ON AN INDEFINITE
WAITING LIST.
WHY?
BECAUSE THREE STREAMS OF REVENUE
THE PUBLIC DEFENDERS DEPENDS ON
HAVE DECLINED: TRAFFIC FINES,
COURT FEES AND ITS SHARE OF
STATE REVENUES.
IN THE PAST FOUR YEARS, THE
CITY'S PUBLIC DEFENDER'S BUDGET
HAS DROPPED BY A THIRD, FROM
NINE MILLION TO JUST SIX MILLION
DOLLARS PER YEAR.
CHIEF PUBLIC DEFENDER DERWYN
BUNTON SAYS HE BEEN FORCED TO
REDUCE STAFF.
HE ONCE HAD 15 INVESTIGATORS, HE
NOW HAS ONLY EIGHT.
HE HAD 78 ATTORNEYS, NOW REDUCED
TO JUST 42.
>> THE BOTTOM LINE RULE IS WE'RE
REFUSING CASES WE DON'T HAVE
ADEQUATE RESOURCES TO DEFEND.
>> Reporter: TOUGHEST CASES,
COMPLEX CASES?
>> RIGHT NOW IT'S THE TOUGH,
COMPLEX CASES, BECAUSE OUR
RESTRICTION OF SERVICES INCLUDES
IN IT A HIRING FREEZE, I CAN'T
REPLACE PEOPLE WHO LEAVE.
>> Reporter: YOU MEAN LAWYERS
WHO HAVE LEFT YOUR OFFICE?
>> THAT'S CORRECT, AND SO A LOT
OF THE LAWYERS WHO'VE LEFT MY
OFFICE HAVE BEEN VERY
EXPERIENCED LAWYERS, LAWYERS WHO
WOULD NORMALLY TAKE THE RAPES,
ARMED ROBBERIES, MURDERS.
>> HUNDREDS OF PEOPLE CAUGHT IN
A SHOOTOUT TONIGHT IN THE NINTH
WARD, THE CHAOTIC SCENE LEFT
MORE THAN A DOZEN PEOPLE WOUNDED
AT THE BUNNYFRIEND PLAYGROUND.
>> THE TURNING POINT FOR ME, AS
CHIEF, WAS WHEN WE HAD A CASE,
WE HAD A PLAYGROUND SHOOTING, IT
WAS BUNNYFRIEND'S PLAYGROUND
HERE IN NEW ORLEANS.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE ACCUSED
SHOOTERS CLAIMED TO HAVE AN
ALIBI.
AND FORTUNATELY COULD AFFORD TO
HIRE HIS OWN ATTORNEY.
>> THE FAMILY WAS ABLE TO GET A
PRIVATE ATTORNEY, THAT PRIVATE
ATTORNEY WAS ABLE TO GO TO
HOUSTON, FIND THE VIDEO FOOTAGE
OF THEM ACTUALLY SHOPPING IN
HOUSTON AT THE TIME OF THE CRIME
AND I LOOKED AT THAT CASE, AND I
SAID I'M NOT SURE WE WOULD HAVE
MADE IT TO HOUSTON IN TIME.
IT WAS TERRIFYING TO ME, AND I
JUST, I DIDN'T WANT OUR OFFICE
COMPLICIT IN THAT.
I DIDN'T WANT TO PRETEND THAT
EVERYTHING WAS OKAY IN TELLING
OUR CLIENTS, THAT WE HAD
ADEQUATE RESOURCES.
SO WE BEGAN TO REFUSE CASES.
>> Reporter: THE UNITED STATES
CONSTITUTION GUARANTEES ALL
AMERICANS THE RIGHT TO A SPEEDY
AND PUBLIC TRIAL AND THE
ASSISTANCE OF COUNSEL.
AND THE SUPREME COURT RULED IN
1963, "ANY PERSON WHO IS TOO
POOR TO HIRE A LAWYER, CANNOT BE
ASSURED A FAIR TRIAL UNLESS
COUNSEL IS PROVIDED."
ALL OF WHICH MEANS ANYONE WHO
CAN'T AFFORD AN ATTORNEY HAS A
RIGHT TO A PUBLIC DEFENDER.
BUT SOMEONE HAS TO PAY FOR THAT.
>> THE PROBLEM WITH OUR PUBLIC
DEFENDER SYSTEM IN THE STATE IS
THAT IT'S FUNDAMENTALLY BASED ON
SOMETHING THAT IS DOOMED TO
FAIL.
>> Reporter: WALT LEGER, A STATE
REPRESENTATIVE FROM NEW ORLEANS,
SAYS BECAUSE TRAFFIC FINES AND
COURT FEES OFTEN DIDN'T COVER
THE FULL COST OF PUBLIC
DEFENDERS, THE STATE ESTABLISHED
A BOARD A DECADE AGO TO
SUBSIDIZE THEM.
AND THAT BUDGET HAS REMAINED
FLAT.
>> AND SO A 10-YEAR PERIOD WITH
ESSENTIALLY NO GROWTH, AND
OBVIOUSLY ADDITIONAL COSTS
NECESSARY TO PROVIDE THESE
SERVICES, AMOUNTS TO A FAIRLY
SIGNIFICANT CUT OVER TIME.
>> Reporter: LEGER BELIEVES IT
IS ALSO A MISTAKE FOR PUBLIC
DEFENDERS TO RELY ON FEES FROM
THEIR MOSTLY POOR CLIENTS; A $40
APPLICATION FEE PLUS ANOTHER $45
IF THEY ARE CONVICTED.
>> THE PROBLEM THERE BEING IF
YOU ARE IN FACT CONVICTED, THEN
THE LIKELIHOOD OF YOU PAYING ANY
OF THESE FEES IS SLIM TO NONE.
>> Reporter: NEW ORLEANS HAS
APPROVED REGULAR ANNUAL FUNDING
INCREASES FOR THE CITY'S POLICE
AND PROSECUTORS.
SO, WHY IS IT THAT THE INDIGENT
DEFENSE, AS THEY CALL PUBLIC
DEFENDERS, ALWAYS SEEMS TO BE ON
THE SHORT END OF THE STICK?
>> WELL YOU KNOW, I THINK THE
POLITICS OF IT IS VERY OBVIOUS.
IT'S EASY FOR LEGISLATORS, IT'S
EASY FOR CITY COUNCIL PEOPLE,
IT'S EASY FOR MAYORS AND IT'S
EASY FOR GOVERNORS TO SUPPORT
THE FUNDING OF THINGS LIKE LAW
ENFORCEMENT, POLICE, PROSECUTORS
OFFICES, D.A.'S, ATTORNEY
GENERALS.
IT BECOMES LESS POPULAR WITH THE
PUBLIC TO FUND THINGS LIKE
PUBLIC DEFENDERS, IT'S KIND OF
THE SAME OLD CONCEPT OF-- AND
YOU HEAR PEOPLE SAY THIS
SOMETIMES-- "WELL IF THE
PERSON'S BEEN ARRESTED, THEY
MUST BE GUILTY OF SOMETHING,
RIGHT?"
>> Reporter: THE AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION HAS SUED THE NEW
ORLEANS PUBLIC DEFENDER'S OFFICE
IN FEDERAL COURT, SAYING ITS
REFUSAL TO TAKE CASES HAS DOOMED
THE ACCUSED TO "LANGUISH
INDEFINITELY IN JAIL WITHOUT
COUNSEL" AND THE GROWING WAIT
LIST "VIOLATES THEIR
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS."
HENRY CAMPBELL IS AMONG THE
ACCUSED CAUGHT IN LIMBO.
IN MARCH 2013, THE 18-YEAR-OLD
HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT WAS CHARGED
WITH RAPE.
HE'S REMAINED IN JAIL WITHOUT
TRIAL, AS HIS CASE WAS HANDED
OFF FROM ONE PUBLIC DEFENDER TO
ANOTHER.
>> IT'S JUST ASTOUNDING THAT
SOMEONE CAN SIT THERE, THAT THEY
CAN REALLY JUST FALL THROUGH THE
CRACKS.
>> Reporter: GREG CARTER IS A
PRIVATE LAWYER WHO ACCEPTED THE
COURT'S REQUEST TO REPRESENT
CAMPBELL FOR FREE.
>> THIS IS AMAZING, BUT THE
PUBLIC DEFENDER'S OFFICE HAS-- I
DON'T WANT TO SAY LOST-- BUT
THEY CAN'T FIND HIS FILE
CURRENTLY.
AND SO I WENT OVER THERE, I
REQUESTED IT FROM THEM.
FIRST THEY COULDN'T FIND HIS
NAME IN THE COMPUTER SYSTEMS
THEY HAVE OVER THERE.
THEN THEY JUST DON'T KNOW WHERE
TO GO TO PICK UP HIS FILE.
>> Reporter: CARTER SAYS JUSTICE
DELAYED, DUE TO THE PUBLIC
DEFENDERS BUDGET CRISIS, IS NOT
ONLY JUSTICE DENIED, BUT ADDS TO
THE CHALLENGE OF MOUNTING AN
EFFECTIVE DEFENSE.
YOU REALLY HAVEN'T HAD THE TIME
TO SIT DOWN AND TALK TO HIM
ABOUT THE CASE.
>> RIGHT.
>> Reporter: YOU DON'T EVEN HAVE
THE CASE.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Reporter: AND THERE HE SITS.
>> THERE HE SITS.
DAY BY DAY, SITTING IN, I KEEP
CALLING IT A CAGE BUT I MEAN
THAT'S REALLY WHAT IT IS.
HE'S LOCKED IN A CAGE WITH NO
RECOURSE, NO WAY OUT, NO WAY OF
PREPARING FOR TRIAL.
EVERY DAY THAT GOES BY, THERE'S
A POTENTIAL PIECE OF EVIDENCE
THAT'S BEING LOST OR BEING
FORGOTTEN THAT COULD BE THAT ONE
KEY THAT FREES HIM.
THAT EVIDENCE NEVER COMES BACK.
IF SOMEONE FORGETS SOMETHING
THAT COULD BE THE ONE KEY TO
FREEING HIM.
THAT DOESN'T COME BACK.
>> Reporter: THREE FULL YEARS
AFTER HENRY CAMPBELL WAS
ARRAIGNED IN THIS COURTROOM A
COURT-APPOINTED ATTORNEY FILED A
MOTION INVOLVING HENRY AND SIX
OTHER DEFENDANTS.
IT SAID THAT LOUISIANA'S JUSTICE
SYSTEM WAS SO BROKEN, ALLOWING
PRISONERS TO LANGUISH IN JAIL
FOR YEARS, ALLOWING OTHERS TO GO
MONTHS WITHOUT ANY KIND OF LEGAL
REPRESENTATION, THAT IT VIOLATED
THE U.S. CONSTITUTION.
LAST MONTH, A JUDGE AGREED,
ORDERING CAMPBELL AND SIX OTHER
DEFENDANTS, ALL CHARGED WITH
SERIOUS CRIMES, INCLUDING MURDER
AND ASSAULT WITH A DEADLY
WEAPON, TO BE RELEASED.
THE STATE IS NOW APPEALING THE
RELEASE ORDER, SO CAMPBELL AND
THE OTHER MEN REMAIN BEHIND
BARS.
THE HEAD OF THE STATE'S DISTRICT
ATTORNEYS ASSOCIATION IS BATON
ROUGE D.A. HILLAR MOORE.
FROM A PROSECUTOR'S POINT OF
VIEW, THIS IS A WORST CASE
SCENARIO.
>> IT'S VERY SCARY.
>> Reporter: THESE ARE PEOPLE
THAT YOU AND YOUR OTHER D.A.'S
HAVE SPECIFICALLY PUT IN PRISON.
ARRESTED, DONE THE WORK.
>> WE BELIEVE THEY ARE VERY
DANGEROUS INDIVIDUALS.
I THINK THAT IF YOU ASKED THE
LAWYERS THAT REPRESENT THEM,
THEY WILL TELL YOU THAT THEY
BELIEVE THAT THEY'RE DANGEROUS
INDIVIDUALS THAT ARE NOW BEING
REQUIRED TO BE BONDED OUT OF
JAIL, BECAUSE THEY DON'T HAVE A
LAWYER.
AND LOOK, IT'S BASIC TO OUR
SYSTEM THAT THESE PEOPLE ARE,
REGARDLESS OF WHAT I THINK,
REGARDLESS OF WHAT THE
ALLEGATIONS ARE, THEY'RE
REQUIRED TO HAVE ADEQUATE, A
GOOD DEFENSE.
AND SO I THINK THE JUDGE IS IN A
POSITION WHERE HE HAD NO OTHER
CHOICE BUT TO DO WHAT HE DID.
>> Reporter: BESIDES THE
POLITICS, A PUBLIC DEFENDER
BAILOUT FROM THE STATE IS
UNLIKELY, DUE TO A MASSIVE
BUDGET CRUNCH IN LOUISIANA.
A 2008 TAX CUT FOLLOWED BY A
STEEP DROP IN REVENUES FROM THE
STATE'S OIL AND GAS INDUSTRY HAS
LEFT LEGISLATORS LIKE WALT LEGER
SCRAMBLING TO CUT SPENDING ON
EVERYTHING, FROM SCHOOLS TO
HOSPITALS.
HOW OFTEN DO YOU ALLOW YOURSELF
TO JUST SIT BACK AND THINK,
"WHAT A MESS."
>> THE THOUGHT CROSSES MY MIND
EVERY DAY.
AT THIS POINT IN THE STATE OF
LOUISIANA, IN MY MIND, PROVIDING
HIGH QUALITY ACCESS TO
HEALTHCARE FOR ALL OF OUR
CITIZENS IS A PRIORITY, BEYOND
THAT, THERE ARE THINGS LIKE
FUNDING OUR COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES AT AN APPROPRIATE
LEVEL TO MAKE SURE THAT WE HAVE
THE OPPORTUNITY TO EXPAND AND
GROW OUR ECONOMY HERE.
>> Reporter: BUT I NOTICE EVEN
IN THAT LIST, THE PUBLIC
DEFENDER'S OFFICE DOESN'T REALLY
COME UP TO THE TOP.
>> IT DOESN'T WITH ME, AND FOR
ME, I'M SOMEONE WHO REALLY
UNDERSTANDS THE IMPORTANCE OF IT
BECAUSE I'VE BEEN INVOLVED IN
DEALING WITH IT.
BUT CERTAINLY I THINK YOU CAN
ASK EVERY LEGISLATOR IN THE
BODY, I DON'T THINK IT WOULD
MAKE THE TOP TEN LIST.
>> Reporter: PUBLIC DEFENDER
WILL SNOWDEN BELIEVES HIS
SMALLER CASELOAD NOW ALLOWS HIM
TO DO A BETTER A JOB, BUT AT A
STEEP COST TO SOCIETY.
>> IT'S AT THE PRICE OF PEOPLE
SITTING IN JAIL FOR THREE
MONTHS, TWO MONTHS, FOUR MONTHS,
WHATEVER IT MAY BE, WITHOUT A
LAWYER.
AND I HATE FOR THAT TO BE THE
COST OF DOING BETTER WORK FOR
THE CLIENTS THAT I HAVE, BUT
THEN THERE ARE CLIENTS WHO
NOBODY IS DOING ANY WORK FOR.
AND THAT'S WHERE THE INJUSTICE
LIES, THAT THESE PEOPLE, CASE,
THEIR DEFENSE IS LITERALLY JUST
PASSING AWAY WITH THE PASSING OF
TIME.
>> O'Brien: LEARN ABOUT NEW
TECHNOLOGIES BEING DEVELOPED TO
MAKE FIREARMS SAFER.
READ OUR REPORT ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> O'Brien: THE ISLAMIC STATE IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA, OR ISIS, HAS
DRAWN RECRUITS FROM ALL OVER THE
WORLD, SO-CALLED FOREIGN
FIGHTERS.
THE U.S. DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE HAS PUT THE NUMBER
AT 38,000, INCLUDING AN
ESTIMATED 250 RECRUITS FROM THE
U.S.
BUT THIS WEEK, THE PENTAGON SAID
THE PACE OF ISIS RECRUITING HAS
DROPPED 75%, FROM 2,000 FIGHTERS
A MONTH TO 500.
ONE REASON, ACCORDING TO THE
MILITARY: CONSISTENT U.S.-LED
AIR STRIKES ON ISIS POSITIONS.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS THIS IS DOUG
OLLIVANT, A RETIRED U.S. ARMY
LIEUTENANT COLONEL AND NOW A
PARTNER AT THE GLOBAL MANAGEMENT
CONSULTING FIRM MANTID
INTERNATIONAL.
>> NICE TO SEE YOU THANKS FOR
TALKING WITH ME.
HOW BE BE ACCURATE DO YOU THINK
THESE NUMBERS ARE?
>> A GOOD ESTIMATE, THERE MAY BE
A 10% TOLERANCE EITHER WAY BUT
WE HAVE A PRETTY GOOD FEEL FOR
HOW LARGE THE FLOW IS AND
CERTAINLY WE CAN SEE IT'S DOWN.
SO IT MAY NOT BE DOWN 25% BUT IT
IS SIGNIFICANTLY FEWER THAN A
YEAR OR TWO AGO.
>> O'Brien: DOES THIS GIVE
YOU ANY INSIGHT INTO EXACTLY
WHAT IS HAPPENING INSIDE
I.S.I.S.?
>> SEVERAL THINGS ARE HAPPENING.
FIRST AS THE MILITARY POINTS OUT
THEY ARE KILLING A WHOLE BUNCH
OF THEM BUT I.S.I.S. HAS LOST
SIGNIFICANT AMOUNTS OF TERRITORY
INSIDE IRAQ AND SYRIA AND
PERHAPS JUST AS IMPORTANTLY THEY
HAVE LOST A LOT OF THEIR MONEY.
WE HAVE ACTUALLY PHYSICALLY
BLOWN UP LARGE STOCKS THEY HAD
IN BANKS AND HOUSES IN MOSUL AND
AS WE KNOW WE HAVE ALSO CUT OFF
THEIR ABILITY TO SMUG OUT THE --
SMUGGLE OUT THE OIL.
THEY HAVE NO LOCKER THE
APPEARANCE OF WINNING IN IRAQ
AND SYRIA, THEY HAVE LOST MAJOR
CITIES AND CAN'T PAY LARGE
SALARIES.
>> O'Brien: DO YOU THINK
THERE WILL BE A MOVEMENT FROM
CREATING A CALIPHATE IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA TO LONE WOLVES STAYING
WHERE THEY ARE?
>> TALKING TO ON SOCIAL MEDIA,
DON'T COME HERE, STAY HOME,
THAT'S MAKING LEMONADE OUT OF
LEMONS, THEY CAN'T PAY THEM SO
THEY TELL THEM TO STAY HOME.
THAT'S SOMETHING WE'RE JUST AS
CONCERNED ABOUT IF NOT MORE SO,
ARE THE RADICAL JIHADISTS DOING
THESE LONE WOLF OR VERY SMALL
GROUP ATTACKS.
>> O'Brien: ULTIMATELY DOES
THIS SEE PEOPLE OUTSIDE OF
I.S.I.S. FEEL SAFER.
IF YOU HAVE A NUMBER OF LONE
WOLVES OPERATING, IF THESE
ATTACKS RELATIVELY LOW COST AND
MAYBE NOT EVEN ORGANIZED, DOES
THE END GOAL MAKES US FEEL
SAFER?
>> NO.
THIS IS BAD NEWS PARTICULARLY
FOR EUROPE WHERE A MUCH LARGER
PERCENTAGE OF THESE FOREIGN
FIGHTERS COME FROM AND FOR THAT
MATTER, THE OTHER COUNTRIES IN
THE REGION.
THE SAUDIS, THE TUNISIANS, THE
LARGEST COUNTRIES PROVIDING
FIGHTERS.
IF THEIR RADICALS STAY HOME,
YOU HAVE TO WONDER WHAT THEY'RE
GOING TO DO THERE.
>> DOUG OLLIVANT THANK YOU FOR
JOINING US.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> O'Brien: THE COMMANDER-IN-
CHIEF TURNED COMEDIAN-IN-CHIEF
LAST NIGHT, ENTERTAINING THE
WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENTS
ASSOCIATION DINNER FOR THE
EIGHTH AND FINAL TIME.
MR. OBAMA DISHED SOME ONE-LINERS
ABOUT HIMSELF AND THOSE WHO HOPE
TO REPLACE HIM.
>> IF THIS MATERIAL WORKS WELL,
I'M GOING TO USE IT AT GOLDMAN
SACHS NEXT YEAR.
EARN ME SOME SERIOUS TUBMANS.
BERNIE, YOU LOOK LIKE A MILLION
BUCKS.
OR, TO PUT IN TERMS YOU'LL
UNDERSTAND, YOU LOOK LIKE 37,000
DONATIONS OF $27 EACH.
HILLARY TRYING TO APPEAL TO
YOUNG VOTERS IS A LITTLE BIT
LIKE YOUR RELATIVE WHO JUST
SIGNED UP FOR FACEBOOK.
"DEAR AMERICA, DID YOU GET MY
POKE?
IS IT APPEARING ON YOUR WALL?
I'M NOT SURE I'M USING THIS
RIGHT.
LOVE, AUNT HILLARY."
YOU GOT A ROOM FULL OF
REPORTERS, CAMERAS, CELEBRITIES,
AND HE SAYS NO.
IS THIS DINNER TOO TACKY FOR THE
DONALD?
WHAT COULD HE POSSIBLY BE DOING
INSTEAD?
IS HE AT HOME EATING A TRUMP
STEAK, TWEETING OUT INSULTS TO
ANGELA MERKEL?
WHAT'S HE DOING?
TED HAD A TOUGH WEEK.
HE WENT TO INDIANA.
HOOSIER COUNTRY.
STOOD ON A BASKETBALL COURT AND
CALLED THE HOOP A BASKETBALL
RING.
WHAT ELSE IS IN HIS LEXICON?
BASEBALL STICKS?
FOOTBALL HATS?
BUT SURE, I'M THE FOREIGN ONE.
>> O'Brien: AND FINALLY, THE
OBAMA'S OLDER DAUGHTER IS GOING
TO HARVARD.
BUT NOT RIGHT AWAY.
17-YEAR-OLD MALIA OBAMA WHO
GRADUATES NEXT MONTH WILL ENROLL
AT HARVARD IN THE FALL OF 2017,
TAKING A YEAR OFF.
NO WORD ON WHAT SHE'LL DO DURING
HER GAP YEAR.
THE PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY
BOTH ATTENDED HARVARD LAW
SCHOOL.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TOMORROW, JUDY
WOODRUFF VISITS WARREN BUFFETT'S
SON HOWARD TO SEE HOW HE'S
TRYING TO TRANSFORM AGRICULTURE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M SOLEDAD O'BRIEN, GOOD NIGHT.